# Definitions

**Types of Jails/Prisons**
  * **County Jail:** The main difference between jail and prison is based on duration of the term. Jails are short-term holding facilities for the newly arrested and those awaiting trial or sentencing (e.g. currently making appearances in court and were unable to make bail). Local facilities under the jurisdiction of a city, local district, or county. Those sentenced to serve a small amount of time (< 1 year) may be housed in the local jail for the duration of the sentence. County jails also offer and manage alternatives to jail such as work release programs, work furlough, house arrest, and private county jails where the person convicted can serve their sentences on weekends. 
  * **Private County Jail / City Jail / Pay-to-Stay:** Terms are interchangeable. Privately operated prisons usually run by a corporation, that the state contracts with to house prisoners. Typically houses those who have other obligations like work, children, medical that cannot be put on hold. Typically has a more relaxed environment, cleaner, and allows for private rooms. You can also bring books and a laptop. You are also allowed to split your time and go home on weekdays. 
  * **State Prison:** Institutional facilities under the jurisdiction of the state where convicted offenders serve longer sentences for more serious crimes. People who have been found guilty of breaking a state law are usually sent to a state prison. 
Example: a person who has been charged with murder will be taken into custody and housed in County Jail. He attends a bail hearing and no bail is set, which means he will have to remain in custody because he is either a flight risk, or a harm to society, or both. During the course of his trial he remains in County Jail. He is later convicted and sentenced to 25 years to life in Prison. Then he will be transferred to State Prison to serve his penalty.
  * **Federal Prison:** Those who have violated federal laws are typically sent to federal prison located somewhere in the U.S. 

**California Courts**
  * **California Superior Courts:** Also called **trial courts**, these courts handle all civil cases (), all criminal cases, small claims and appeals of small claims cases, appeals of civil cases involving $25,000 or less, and appeals of infractions (like traffic) and misdemeanor cases. There are 58 superior courts, one for each county. 
  * **California Appellate Courts:** Appellate courts are higher courts that review decisions from trial courts for those who lose a case in a trial court.  The Court of Appeals hears appeals from family law cases, probate cases, juvenile cases, felony cases, and civil cases for more than $25,000. A panel of three judges, called "justices" decide appeals from trial courts. There are 6 appellate courts in California, with each responsible for a number of counties. 
  * **California Supreme Court:** The California Supreme court is the highest court in the state. It reviews cases decided by the appellate courts, and also hears cases that skip appellate courts and go directly to the California Supreme Court. These cases consist of death penalty appeals and disciplinary cases involving judges. 4 of the 7 justices of the California Supreme Court must agree to come to a decision on the case.
 
**Types of Cases**
  * **Civil Cases:** Cases involving disputes between private citizens or companies that do not involve breaking a criminal law. Civil cases include: disputes involving money over contracts, damaged property, or injury, small claims, family law (divorces, child custody, adoptions, etc.), landlord/tenant cases, probate cases,  juvenile cases, civil harassment, elder abuse, and many others. 
  * **Criminal Cases:** Criminal cases are brought by the state against an individual and fall under three categories: 
    * **Infractions:** Minor violations where punishment involves paying a fine. These include traffic violations, possessing less than 1 ounce of marijuana, littering, disturbing the peace, violating building or housing codes, etc. 
    * **Misdemeanors:** More serious crimes which carry penalties of up to 1 year in county jail but not time in prison and/or fines of up to $1,000. These include trespassing, disorderly conduct, vandalism, DUI, domestic violence, shoplifting, petty theft, assault and battery, indecent exposure, drug possession, prostitution, disturbing the peace, etc. 
    * **Felonies:** Felonies are the most serious type of crime. These crimes carry penalties of more than 1 year in state prison, fines, probations, parole, and other penalities, or in the most serious cases, the death penalty. These crimes include murder, homicide, manslaughter, rape, assault with a deadly weapon, battery, hate crimes, kidnapping, drug possession, drug distribution, gang cases, grand theft, hate crimes, DUI, child pornography, obstructing justice, perjury, criminal threats, etc. 
  
**Felony Sentencing**
California’s criminal justice system uses three types of sentences for people who are convicted of crimes: probation, determinate sentences, and indeterminate sentences. 
  * **Determinate Sentences**: Determinate sentences are for a **specific amount of time**, like 5 years, after which the offender is released. These sentences are set by the Determinate Sentencing Law (DSL), which is based on sentencing guidelines, mandatory minimum sentences, and enhanced sentences statutes. Most sentences in California are set per the DSL. 
    * **Sentencing Triad**: Under determinate sentencing, the state penal code specifies a low, medium, and high sentencing term for each offense, called the **sentencing triad**. Judges are expected to impose the middle term, unless there are 'aggravating or mitigating' factors whereby the judge may impose the lower or upper term. For example, the sentencing triad for the unlawful taking of a vehicle (Penal Code Section 10851(a) allows the court to sentence the offender to 16 months, 2 years, or 3 years. 
    * **Enhances Sentence Statues**: The court can also 'enhance' or add to the length of a sentence (such as by 5 years), as specified in statute, based on circumstances around the crime (like committing a felony to benefit a gang) or around the individual's criminal history (offenders previously convicted of a serious felony). 
  * **Indeterminate Sentences**: Indeterminate sentences are for a **minimum amount to unspecified maximum amount of time**, such as "25-years-to-life". After serving the minimum sentence, a parole board determines whether the offender is 'sufficiently rehabilitated'. These are used only for certain series crimes, like first degree murder. 
  
### Sources
1. https://www.prisonfellowship.org/resources/training-resources/in-prison/faq-jail-prison/
2. https://www.hoffmanlawoffice.com/differences-between-state-prison-and-county-jail.html
3. [How courts work - California Courts website](http://www.courts.ca.gov/998.htm)
4. [Court Speak - Los Angeles Superior Court](http://www.lacourt.org/newsmedia/Uploads/14200972484357MediaGlossary-pdf_Layout1.pdf):  - Definitions of common legal terms provided by the Los Angeles Superior Court
5. [California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation](https://www.cdcr.ca.gov/victim_services/sentencing.html#CALIFORNIAS_SENTENCING_LAWS)
6. [Sentencing in California - California Budget and Policy Center](https://calbudgetcenter.org/resources/sentencing-in-california-moving-toward-a-smarter-more-cost-effective-approach/#Sentencing)
7. [California Sentencing Cheatsheet - Avvo](https://www.avvo.com/legal-guides/ugc/ca-felony-sentencing-cheat-sheet)
